It's Tuesday the 30th of October 2018 and I am Nigel May standing in for Stephanie Cruz,
Cultural Heritage Officer for the Elan Valley Project.
With me today are Tim Hipkis, Mike Leitcham and Don Emerich.
That's correct.
I pronounced that correctly.
A group of friends who are walking the Elan Valley Way and Sections.
Thank you for talking to me today.
Don, if I can start with you, I know you and your friends have been walking together now
for many years and have done over 200 walks across England and the Welsh Marches.
What made you choose the Elan Valley Way and when did you start doing it?
When did we start doing it?
May this year.
Like you said, we'd done quite a lot of walks and we were doing a St Canelm's Way and on
that way we saw some pipe work being laid, the pipe works being laid and we took an interest
mostly because they're made in Spain and I have experience of living in Spain so I caught
our eye and took some nice photographs and then Tim did some research and found out about
the Elan Way and has organised the walk and off we go.
Right.
Thanks Don.
Whilst the Elan Valley doesn't follow the exact route of the pipeline from Elan Valley
to Franklin and Birmingham, Mike, what are your thoughts on this massive piece of Victorian
engineering?
I was just amazed to find out the detail about it.
We actually had a walk which took in the pipes crossing the Ledwich Brook just east of Ludlow
which was in our local paper and we went and did that a couple of years ago I think and
the detail was given in that article.
It was just amazing the fact that it's all done by gravity which I never realised.
I thought all those little houses you could see were pump houses but the fact that it's
all gravity and that it was all done what, 130, 110, 120 years ago wasn't it?
There was a lot of experience then.
They dug canals, Manchester and Liverpool had had water from the Lake District and Lake
Wrenwey and so on so there was a lot of experience but it was still I think a brilliant undertaking
that the water can fall at the rate of, well across your living room, sixteenth of an inch
and do that for 73 miles or whatever.
I think it's absolutely staggering.
I visited the Elan Valley and the lakes and so on many times with the kids and the grandkids
but never appreciated the scale of it until I read those sort of details and then we saw
the pipes and it's been great.
Ever since we've enjoyed it.
Thanks Mike.
And finally Tim, I know you used to be a geography teacher.
Is there any elements that stand out for you particularly in terms of social geography
of the pipeline?
Yeah, I've done a script here and I think it's best if I go through them and then you
can use it however you want.
I said my interest was provoked like Mike and Don when we crossed the new pipeline route
on several occasions throughout our last walk.
I contacted 7 Trent to find out what it was all about.
I had a very helpful document download which explained that the new pipeline was being
constructed to enable work to be done on the existing pipeline as and when needed.
If the pipeline was closed this new section called the Birmingham Resilience Project would
be used to keep water flowing to Birmingham.
The 26K pipeline runs from Lickhill on the River Severn between Budely and Stourport
to Frankley Reservoir.
I then contacted a friend who I'd recorded asking me to walk with him on the Elam Valley
Way near my home.
I was then able to secure an out of print copy of the book and put the idea to the others.
Geographically these are the points that have interested me.
What was the reason for the dams and aqueduct?
The area selected to meet a need for fresh water was based on sound theoretical geography
i.e. there was high rainfall in the area, on average 70mm per annum.
The narrow valleys were ideal for building dams.
The bedrock of the area was impermeable, ideal for retaining water.
And the two valleys were higher than Birmingham, thus gravity would facilitate the flow to
Birmingham avoiding the need for pumps.
Second point, the effect on the population of the valleys was negative but positive for
the growing population of Birmingham.
In Elan 18 cottages, a church, a chapel, a school and two residences were destroyed.
The effects of, the third point, the effects of major construction project not just in
Elan but along the route.
The influx of navvies on the social make-up of the various settlements.
Increasing demand in Birmingham led to the construction of a second reservoir, Barclay,
which is now a provider of open space and water activities.
That was in the 1930s I think.
Industry and nature along the route is the fifth point.
The geology of the iron, coal and limestone deposits along the route around Coockley,
on the Clees, around Lentwood Island and so on.
Sixth point, the nature and wildlife on the two Birmingham reservoirs and at Trimpley
and the stunning scenery, the woods, the vistas, the route through the wire forest.
Seven on the Clee Hills, there was the history of it, the scattered settlements and evidence
of pipeline valve chambers were appearing and the interesting human population I think
is the expression interesting in quotation marks.
The eighth, the area south of Ludlow, the vision of the three pipes crossing at Ledwich
and the Canem Iron Age Camp nearby.
The ninth point, Lentwood Island itself is a Roman site and the influence of the Marcher
Lords, the boundary between England and Wales, why was it there and so on.
Tenth point, the wildlife and land use on the approach to Knighton and the hills of
the marchers has been fascinating.
The eleventh point, the warring factions, Owain, Glendua, the Mortimer's, the English Civil
War, whilst that's a matter of history, why here, why in this region?
And finally, Offers Dyke, which we're going to walk today, why is it there, how was it
built and what's its route?
Those are my points that I would use as a geography teacher that I could see an awful
lot of work done with my colleagues in history and biology and so on.
Thanks Tim, that was very very thorough and thank you for that.
In conclusion, are there any other points that you'd like to say about the valley and
the pipeline?
It's the countryside.
I would just add to that, yeah.
I think also the contrast from beginning in Birmingham and realising that all this pipe
work is bringing water and you just take it for granted, water's so much tame for granted.
And then walking through fabulous countryside, absolutely wonderful.
And we've met some nice people along the way.
Cumberlanding agree.
Well, thank you very much for your time, it's very very much appreciated and good luck with
the rest of the walk and hope you have an enjoyable time.
Thank you.